24.0.0.8-beta staging (#3893)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2024-07-30-24.0.0.8-beta.adoc

---
layout: post

> title: "Simplify your runtime configuration with versionless features in 24.0.08-beta"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Simplify your runtime configuration with versionless features in 24.0.0.8-beta"

```

# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/dmuelle
author_github: https://github.com/dmuelle

> seo-title: Simplify your runtime configuration with versionless features in 24.0.08-beta - OpenLiberty.io

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-title: Simplify your runtime configuration with versionless features in 24.0.0.8-beta - OpenLiberty.io

```

seo-description: This release simplifies choosing compatible features for the MicroProfile, Jakarta EE, and Java EE platforms by introducing versionless features. It also includes previews of Jakarta EE 11 and MicroProfile 7.0 beta features and a partitioned cookies function.
blog_description: This release simplifies choosing compatible features for the MicroProfile, Jakarta EE, and Java EE platforms by introducing versionless features. It also includes previews of Jakarta EE 11 and MicroProfile 7.0 beta features and a partitioned cookies function.
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---

> = Simplify your runtime configuration with versionless features in 24.0.08-beta

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Simplify your runtime configuration with versionless features in 24.0.0.8-beta

```

//
// Throughout the doc, replace 24.0.0.8-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 24.0.0.8-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<versionless, Streamline feature selection with versionless Jakarta EE and MicroProfile features>>
* <<cookie, Keep using third party cookies with CHIPS>>

MicroProfile 7.0 beta features:

* <<ft, Integrate fault tolerance with Open Telemetry in Fault Tolerance 4.1>>
* <<rc, Align your REST client with Jakarta RESTful Web Services in MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0 >>
* <<mptel, Collect and export HTTP metrics and logs in MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0>>
* <<openapi, Document APIs in OpenAPI 3.1 format with MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0>>

Jakarta EE 11 beta features:

* <<data, Bring your own Jakarta Data provider with Jakarta Data API 1.0>>
* <<faces, Bring your own Jakarta Faces implementation with Jakarta Faces Container 4.1>>
* <<websocket, Broadcast to multiple clients with Jakarta WebSocket 2.2>>

> * <<jpa, Use Jakarta Persistance with improved type safety and other enhancements in Jakarta Persistanc 3.2>>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* <<jpa, Use Jakarta Persistence with improved type safety and other enhancements in Jakarta Persistence 3.2>>

```

// change the SUB_TAG_1/2/3 to the heading tags
//
// However if there's only 1 new feature, delete the previous section and change it to the following sentence:
// "The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 24.0.0.8-beta includes SUB_FEATURE_TITLE"
// // // // // // // //

See also link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[previous Open Liberty beta blog posts].

[#versionless]
== Streamline feature selection with versionless Jakarta EE and MicroProfile features

With Open Liberty, you can configure only the features at the specific versions that your application needs. This composable design pattern minimizes the resources the runtime needs, keeping application startup times short and memory footprints low. However, you might not always know which version of a feature is compatible with the other features your application needs. Determining the correct version typically requires a mix of experimentation, guesswork, and digging deep into feature documentation. Versionless features alleviate this burden by automating feature version selection, so you can focus on building your applications instead of picking feature versions.

> Versionless features simplify your server configuration by providing are a generic way to specify Open Liberty features without having to specify a feature version. These new features are available for the MicroProfile, Jakarata EE, and Java EE platforms. When you use versionless features, you must specify a corresponding versioned platform element in your `server.xml` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Versionless features simplify your server configuration by providing are a generic way to specify Open Liberty features without having to specify a feature version. These new features are available for the MicroProfile, Jakarta EE, and Java EE platforms. When you use versionless features, you must specify a corresponding versioned platform element in your `server.xml` file.

```

> Versionless features simplify your server configuration by providing are a generic way to specify Open Liberty features without having to specify a feature version. These new features are available for the MicroProfile, Jakarata EE, and Java EE platforms. When you use versionless features, you must specify a corresponding versioned platform element in your `server.xml` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Versionless features simplify your server configuration by providing a generic way to specify Open Liberty features without having to specify a feature version. These new features are available for the MicroProfile, Jakarata EE, and Java EE platforms. When you use versionless features, you must specify a corresponding versioned platform element in your `server.xml` file.

```

[source,xml]
----
    <!-- Enable features -->
    <featureManager>
        <platform>javaee-8.0</platform>
        <feature>servlet</feature>
        <feature>jpa</feature>
        <feature>jaxrs</feature>
    </featureManager>
----

Check out the full collection of available platforms and versionless features in the <<platform-ref, lists at the end of this post>>. Stay tuned for more information versionless features in a forthcoming blog post and full documentation when versionless features are released for general availability (GA).

=== Known limitations

* Error handling scenarios return generic messages.
* Feature installation scenarios that use  command-line tools, including Maven and Gradle plug-ins, are not supported.

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>
// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29122
// Contact/Reviewer: benjamin-confino
// // // // // // // //

[#cookie]
== Keep using third party cookies with CHIPS

> To increase privacy and reduce tracking, link:https://developers.google.com/privacy-sandbox/3pcd/[Google Chrome announced it would phase out third-party cookies in 2025]. However, some sites that are designed with third-party cookies in mind are broken by this change. Chrome provides link:https://developers.google.com/privacy-sandbox/3pcd/prepare/test-for-breakage[documentation] to help you test whether your sites are affected. If you are, a handful of options are provided to mitigate this change. One such option is called CHIPS: Cookies Having Independent Partitioned State.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To increase privacy and reduce tracking, link:https://developers.google.com/privacy-sandbox/3pcd/[Google Chrome announced it would phase out third-party cookies in 2025]. Although, as of July 22, 2024, link:https://privacysandbox.com/news/privacy-sandbox-update/[Chrome stated they may scrap the phase out plan] due to regulatory concerns.  Users instead would be given the option to block third party cookies via their browser.  Partitioned would be needed for these use cases. Some sites that are designed with third-party cookies in mind are broken by browsers that opt-in to block third party cookies.  Chrome provides link:https://developers.google.com/privacy-sandbox/3pcd/prepare/test-for-breakage[documentation] to help you test whether your sites are affected. If you are, a handful of options are provided to mitigate this change. One such option is called CHIPS: Cookies Having Independent Partitioned State.

```

MicroProfile Fault Tolerance helps you easily identify and mitigate failures in your code. It provides annotations that you can add to methods to use bulkhead, circuit breaker, retry, timeout, and fallback strategies.

The new `mpFaultTolerance-4.1` feature integrates with the `mpTelemetry-2.0` feature, so that Fault Tolerance can export metric data to Open Telemetry. With this change, and other changes in `mpTelemetry-2.0`, you can use Open Telemetry as the single source for logging, metrics, and tracing, making it easier to manage and configure your application observability.

To enable this functionality, enable `mpFaultTolerance-4.1` and `mpTelemetry-2.0` in your `server.xml` file and then configure `mpTelemetry-2.0` to export metrics. The following examples show a minimal configuration for Open Telemetry to export to your `messages.log` file and a class that generates Fault Tolerance metrics (it must be accessed as a CDI bean).

=== server.xml file configuration

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>mpFaultTolerance-4.1</feature>
  <feature>mpTelemetry-2.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

=== bootstrap.properties file configuration

> The following example configures Open Telemetry to only output metrics to the `messages.log` file.

Reviewer 4: Add another line beneath here saying

`It also sets a very low interval for exporting metrics so you can see the results quickly`

[source,xml]
----
otel.sdk.disabled=false
otel.metrics.exporter=logging
otel.logs.exporter=none
otel.traces.exporter=none

> TODO; set the timeout to a low number so people will see the metrics quickly. Then mention why you did so in the paragraph apart

Reviewer 4: Replace this TODO (and the empty line above it) with 

otel.metric.export.interval=500

----

=== Example application class

Ensure that this class is injected as a CDI bean and invoked by the user in whatever way you prefer.

[source,xml]
----
import org.eclipse.microprofile.faulttolerance.Retry;
import jakarta.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;

@ApplicationScoped

> public class Example Class {

Reviewer: Ensure this is valid Java that will compile
```suggestion
public class ExampleClass {

```

    @Retry
    public int exampleMethod(String name) {
        return 1;
    }
}
----

You can read more detail about the changes in the new version in the link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-fault-tolerance-4.1-RC2/microprofile-fault-tolerance-spec-4.1-RC2.html[Microprofile Fault Tolerance 4.1 RC2 specification] and link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-fault-tolerance-4.1-RC2/apidocs/[API Javadoc].

> You can learn more about how to use MicroProfile OpenAPI from our link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/fault-tolerance.html[documentation] and link:https://openliberty.io/guides/#fault_tolerance[guide].

Reviewer 4: The link text `guide` should be plural.

* Use of full JSON Schema 2020-12 draft for data object schemas (updated from a subset of an older JSON schema draft in 3.0)
* Support for documenting webhooks
* Reusable PathItems
* Updates to the model API so that it directly reflects the OpenAPI 3.1 format
* Additions to the annotations API to allow users to take advantage of the new features of OpenAPI 3.1

A detailed list of changes can be found in the link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-4.0-RC4/microprofile-openapi-spec-4.0-RC4.html#release_notes_40[release notes of the specification].

This is an early beta release to support the ratification of MicroProfile 7.0. As such, some function which was available in previous versions of the feature are not yet implemented:

- Documenting more than one web module as link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html#multi-module[can be configured in previous versions]
- Validation of the produced OpenAPI document

=== Further resources:

For more information, see the following resources:

> - linkhttps://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-4.0-RC4/microprofile-openapi-spec-4.0-RC4.html[MP OpenAPI 4.0 RC4 specification document] and link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-4.0-RC4/apidocs/[API Javadoc].

Reviewer 5: The first link is broken in the preview.

The Jakarta Data API feature (`dataContainer-1.0`) enables you to use third-party Jakarta Data providers in Open Liberty without including the built-in provider for EclipseLink. This configuration is useful if you want to use a different Jakarta Persistence-based Jakarta Data provider, such as Hibernate, without colliding on the Jakarta Persistence Entity annotation. It's also useful if you want to use Jakarta NoSQL exclusively and do not want the overhead of the built-in provider for relational databases.

To use a third-party Jakarta Data provider, enable the `dataContainer-1.0` feature in your `server.xml` file. You can then include a third-party Jakarta Data provider in your server configuration by using the `library` element.

The following `server.xml` file example shows the configuration to use the Eclipse jNoSQL Jakarta Data provider and a MongoDB database:

[source,xml]
----
  <featureManager>
    <feature>dataContainer-1.0</feature>

    <!-- Features needed for jNoSQL config / processing -->
    <feature>mpConfig-3.1</feature>
    <feature>jsonb-3.0</feature>
  </featureManager>

>   <library id="jnosql">
>   	<!-- Jakarta NoSQL API -->
>   	<fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/nosql" includes="jakarta.nosql-api.jar" />
>   	<!-- Eclipse jNoSQL Implementation of Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data -->
>     <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/jnosql"
>     	includes="jnosql-communication-core.jar jnosql-mapping-core.jar jnosql-mongodb.jar *.jar" />
>     <!-- Mongo java driver -->
>     <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/mongodb"
>     	includes="mongodb-driver-core.jar mongodb-driver-sync.jar" />
>   </library>

Reviewer 2: Fix weird spacing.

```suggestion
  <library id="jnosql">
    <!-- Jakarta NoSQL API -->
    <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/nosql"
    	includes="jakarta.nosql-api.jar" />
    <!-- Eclipse jNoSQL Implementation of Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data -->
    <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/jnosql"
    	includes="jnosql-communication-core.jar jnosql-mapping-core.jar jnosql-mongodb.jar *.jar" />
    <!-- Mongo java driver -->
    <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/mongodb"
    	includes="mongodb-driver-core.jar mongodb-driver-sync.jar" />
  </library>

```

The Faces Container feature is updated in this beta release to support the 4.1 API and implementation JARs. If the 4.1 JARs were used with earlier features, errors occurred because the feature checks against the specification version listed within the jars.

To use the `facesContainer-4.1` feature, add the following code to your `server.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
   <feature>facesContainer-4.1</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For more information, see the following resources:

* link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/feature/facesContainer-4.0.html[Jakarta Faces Container 4.0] feature
* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2024/07/02/24.0.0.7-beta.html#faces41[Faces 4.1 beta blog announcement]
* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/faces/4.1/[Faces 4.1 Javadocs and specification document].

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28769
// Contact/Reviewer: volosied,pnicolucci
// // // // // // // //

[#websocket]

> == Broadcast to multiple clients with Jakarta WebSocket 2.2

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
== Improve Asynchronous Handling with Jakarta WebSocket 2.2

```

Reviewer 3: The title is a little to generic (broadcasting behavior already exists for earlier websocket versions), so I would change it

The Jakarta WebSocket 2.2 (`websocket-2.2`) feature enables communication for endpoints by using the Websocket protocol. It is an implementation of the Jakarta EE 11 Websocket 2.2 Specification.

> Although very few specification changes were listed for the 2.2 release, the main change from 2.1 is the introduction of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/apidocs/server/jakarta/websocket/sendresult#getSession[(getSession)] method on the `SendResult` class. This method enables you to retrieve the original session that was used in the asynchronous remote call. This capability is useful for broadcasting messages to numerous listening clients.

Reviewer 6: `#getSession()` would be better as it brings you directly to that method.

Reviewer 6: Currently renders as `(getSession)` is that what we want ?

> The next beta release of websocket-2.2 will limit the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/apidocs/server/jakarta/websocket/onmessage#maxMessageSize([MaxMessageSize]) to `Integer#MAX_VALUE` for the `OnMessage` annotation to avoid type errors.

Reviewer 6: `([ / ])` are reversed compared to the `getSession` method above. Would `#maxMessageSize()` be better to go directly to that element in the Javadoc? Currently renders as: `MaxMessageSize)`

To enable this feature, add the following code to your `server.xml` file.

[source,xml]
----
 <featureManager>
    <feature>websocket-2.2</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For more information, such as the Javadocs, specification documents, and other details,see link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/[Jakarta WebSocket 2.2].

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28921
// Contact/Reviewer: Riva-Tholoor-Philip, jhanders34
// // // // // // // //

[#jpa]

> == Use Jakarta Persistance with improved type safety and other enhancements in Jakarta Persistance 3.2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Use Jakarta Persistence with improved type safety and other enhancements in Jakarta Persistence 3.2

```

The Jakarta Persistence API is a richly featured API which provides object-model approach to persisting, fetching, and modifying data stored on a relational database system.

Jakarta Persistence 3.2 (`persistence-3.2`) includes the following updates:

* Improve type safety of the find() and refresh() methods
* Provide programmatic way to provide Schema Management
* Allow Java records as Embeddable Types

> * Improvements of JPQL/Criteria API - add additional functions and operations, such as `left()`, `right`, `replace`, `||` `operator`, `cast`, `union`, `union all`, `intersect`, `intersect all`, `except`, and  `except all`

Reviewer: Be consistent here. Parentheses aren't shown for others, so omit them from LEFT as well.
The term "operator" describes `||` -- the concatenation operator; it is not a function of its own and should not be highlighted as one.
```suggestion
* Improvements of JPQL/Criteria API - add additional functions and operations, such as `left`, `right`, `replace`, `||` operator, `cast`, `union`, `union all`, `intersect`, `intersect all`, `except`, and  `except all`

```

* Support for subqueries in the `select`, `from`,  and `join` clauses.

To use the `persistence-3.2` feature, add the following code to your `server.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
   <feature>persistence-3.2</feature>
</featureManager>
----

This feature uses Eclipselink 5.0 and the JPA provider. If you wish to bring your own 3rd party persistence provider, enable the `persistenceContainer-3.2` feature instead:

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
   <feature>persistenceContainer-3.2</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For more information, see the link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/data-persistence-jpa.html[Data persistence with the Jakarta Persistence API] in the Open Liberty docs and the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/persistence/3.2/[Jakarta Persistence 3.2 specification document].

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

[#run]
== Try it now

> To try out these features, update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 22, Java SE 21, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8.

Reviewer: Avoid being misleading here.
```suggestion
To try out these features, update your build tools to pull the Open Liberty All Beta Features package instead of the main release. The beta works with Java SE 22, Java SE 21, Java SE 17, Java SE 11, and Java SE 8.  Java SE 17 or above is required for the Jakarta EE 11 features that are in the beta.

```

// {url-prefix}. e.g- link:{url-prefix}/guides/GUIDENAME[GUIDENAME]:
//

This release simplifies choosing compatible features for the MicroProfile, Jakarta EE, and Java EE platforms by introducing versionless features. It also includes previews of Jakarta EE 11 and MicroProfile 7.0 beta features and a partitioned cookies function.

// // // // // // // //
// Change the RELEASE_SUMMARY to an introductory paragraph. This sentence is really
// important because it is supposed to grab the readers attention.  Make sure to keep the blank lines
//
// Throughout the doc, replace 24.0.0.8-beta with the version number of Open Liberty, eg: 22.0.0.2-beta
// // // // // // // //

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 24.0.0.8-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<versionless, Streamline feature selection with versionless Jakarta EE and MicroProfile features>>
* <<cookie, Keep using third party cookies with CHIPS>>

MicroProfile 7.0 beta features:

* <<mp7, Enable the full set of MicroProfile 7.0 beta features with the MicroProfile 7.0 convenience feature>>

> * <<ft, Integrate fault tolerance with Open Telemetry in Fault Tolerance 4.1>>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* <<ft, Integrate fault tolerance and Open Telemetry with MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.1>>
```
This aligns with the other bullets

Reviewer 8: was hoping to avoid "with...with" in this one

Reviewer 7: I switched the first `with` to `and`.  Does that help?

* <<rc, Align your REST client with Jakarta RESTful Web Services with MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0 >>
* <<mptel, Collect and export HTTP metrics and logs with MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0>>
* <<openapi, Document APIs in OpenAPI 3.1 format with MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0>>

Jakarta EE 11 beta features:

* <<data, Bring your own Jakarta Data provider with Jakarta Data API 1.0>>
* <<faces, Bring your own Jakarta Faces implementation with Jakarta Faces Container 4.1>>
* <<websocket, Improve asynchronous handling with Jakarta WebSocket 2.2>>

> * <<jpa, Use Jakarta Persistence with improved type safety and other enhancements in Jakarta Persistence 3.2>>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* <<jpa, Use Jakarta Persistence with improved type safety and other enhancements with Jakarta Persistence 3.2>>
```
Similar consistency alignment

[source,xml]
----
    <!-- Enable features -->
    <featureManager>
        <platform>javaee-8.0</platform>
        <feature>servlet</feature>
        <feature>jpa</feature>
        <feature>jaxrs</feature>
    </featureManager>
----

Check out the full collection of available platforms and versionless features in the <<platform-ref, lists at the end of this post>>. Stay tuned for more information about versionless features in a forthcoming blog post and full documentation when versionless features are released for general availability (GA).

=== Known limitations

* Error handling scenarios return generic messages.
* Feature installation scenarios that use  command-line tools, including Maven and Gradle plug-ins, are not supported.

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>
// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29122
// Contact/Reviewer: benjamin-confino
// // // // // // // //

[#cookie]
== Keep using third party cookies with CHIPS

> To increase privacy and reduce tracking, link:https://developers.google.com/privacy-sandbox/3pcd/[Google Chrome announced it would phase out third-party cookies in 2025]. Although, as of July 22, 2024, link:https://privacysandbox.com/news/privacy-sandbox-update/[Chrome stated they may scrap the phase out plan] due to regulatory concerns.  Users instead would be given the option to block third party cookies via their browser.  Partitioned would be needed for these use cases. Some sites that are designed with third-party cookies in mind are broken by browsers that opt-in to block third party cookies.  Chrome provides link:https://developers.google.com/privacy-sandbox/3pcd/prepare/test-for-breakage[documentation] to help you test whether your sites are affected. If you are, a handful of options are provided to mitigate this change. One such option is called CHIPS: Cookies Having Independent Partitioned State.

Reviewer 7: `Partitioned would be needed` doesn't make a lot of sense here.  It seems like there should be a word after `Partitioned` at bare minimum.  Or maybe this sentence isn't even needed?

Reviewer 7: @pnicolucci can you help with knowing what this sentence is supposed to say?

image::/img/blog/cookie1.png[multisite cookie diagram,width=70%,align="center"]

Chrome provides a `Partitioned` cookie attribute as a workaround for third-party cookies with limitations. This new "Partitioned" attribute divides the cookie jar, as the name indicates. Instead of saving the cookies within the Z site key, they will also be keyed under the top-level site, such as X and Y.  In this way, if X embeds Z and Y embeds Z, the Z's cookies will not be shared between X and Y.

image::/img/blog/cookie2.png[partitioned cookie diagram,width=70%,align="center"]

You can use this new attribute to specify whether a cookie is partitioned. If the `SameSite=None` attribute is missing from the cookie, it is blocked by Chrome and any Chromium-based browsers because it is treated as `Lax`.

> The partitioned attribute configuration is opt-in and behaves much like the SameSite configuration. The `samesite` channel configuration applies to all cookies, while the `httpSession` and `webAppSecurity` configurations apply to their respective cookies. It's important to note that the the `httpSession` and `webAppSecurity` configuration take precedence over the channel configuration. The default values for these two are `defer`, which means they defer to the channel configuration. As for channel configuration, its default value is `false` meaning `Partitioned` is not added.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The partitioned attribute configuration is opt-in and behaves much like the SameSite configuration. The `samesite` channel configuration applies to all cookies, while the `httpSession` and `webAppSecurity` configurations apply to their respective cookies. It's important to note that the `httpSession` and `webAppSecurity` configurations take precedence over the channel configuration. The default values for these two are `defer`, which means they defer to the channel configuration. As for channel configuration, its default value is `false` meaning `Partitioned` is not added.
```

* link:https://openliberty.io/docs/ref/javaee/8/#package=javax/servlet/http/package-frame.html&class=javax/servlet/http/HttpServletResponse.html#addHeader-java.lang.String-java.lang.String-[HttpServletResponse.addHeader]

For more information, including a visual example, see link:https://github.com/privacycg/CHIPS?tab=readme-ov-file#chips-cookies-having-independent-partitioned-state[CHIPS (Cookies Having Independent Partitioned State)] on GitHub.

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>
// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29190
// Contact/Reviewer: yasmin-aumeeruddy
// // // // // // // //

[#mp7]
== Enable the full set of MicroProfile 7.0 beta features with the MicroProfile 7.0 convenience feature

The 24.0.0.8-beta release includes the beta release of MicroProfile 7.0 and the `microProfile-7.0` link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html#[convenience feature].

> MicroProfile 7.0 (MP 7.0) is a major release. It brings in link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/[Jakarta EE 10 Core Profile] APIs and the following MicroProfile component specifications:

Reviewer 7: MP 7.0 supports both EE 10 and EE 11.  The necessary EE 11 features are in beta for EE 11 Core Profile.  Do we want to mention that MP 7.0 enablement in liberty includes support for EE 11 as well in the beta?

Reviewer 8: @yasmin-aumeeruddy ^^

Reviewer 9: Good point I think we should change it to the following:

MicroProfile 7.0 (MP 7.0) is a major release. It brings in link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/10/[Jakarta EE 10] and link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/coreprofile/11/[Jakarta 11] Core Profile APIs and the following MicroProfile component specifications:

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config/releases/tag/3.1[MicroProfile Config 3.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-fault-tolerance/releases/tag/4.1-RC2[MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-health/releases/tag/4.0[MicroProfile Health 4.0]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-telemetry/releases/tag/2.0-RC2[MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-open-api/releases/tag/4.0[MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-jwt-auth/releases/tag/2.1[MicroProfile JWT Authentication 2.1]
* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-rest-client/releases/tag/4.0-RC2[MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0]

// Assisted by watsonx granite-20b-multilingual

The following 4 specifications have updates while the other 3 specifications remain unchanged.

* <<mptel, MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0>>
* <<ft, MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.1>>
* <<openapi, MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0>>

> * <<rc, MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0>>

Reviewer 7: This list is not in the same order as above.  There seems to be no rhyme or reason for the order.  Alphabetical would be nice?  Also there the order here is not the order that the component specification are discussed below it.  I think it should be consistent.  If you go with alphabetical, you might as well do alphabetical in both lists.

Reviewer 8: fixed both to be alphabetical

> MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 now provides support for OpenTelemetry logs and metrics. Consequently, MicroProfile Metrics is not part of MicroProfile 7.0.

Reviewer 7: Do we want to add something here to state that mpMetrics-5.1 feature will work with MP 7.0 features?

Reviewer 8: @yasmin-aumeeruddy ^^

To enable MicroProfile 7.0 and all its constituent features, add the `microProfile-7.0` convenience feature to your `server.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
    <feature>microProfile-7.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

// </GHA-BLOG-SUMMARY>

[#ft]

> == Integrate fault tolerance with Open Telemetry in Fault Tolerance 4.1

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
== Integrate fault tolerance and Open Telemetry with MicroProfile Fault Tolerance 4.1
```

Ensure that this class is injected as a CDI bean and invoked by the user in whatever way you prefer.

[source,xml]
----
import org.eclipse.microprofile.faulttolerance.Retry;
import jakarta.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;

@ApplicationScoped
public class ExampleClass {

    @Retry
    public int exampleMethod(String name) {
        return 1;
    }
}
----

You can read more details about the changes in the new version in the link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-fault-tolerance-4.1-RC2/microprofile-fault-tolerance-spec-4.1-RC2.html[Microprofile Fault Tolerance 4.1 RC2 specification] and link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-fault-tolerance-4.1-RC2/apidocs/[API Javadoc].

You can learn more about how to use MicroProfile Fault Tolerance from our link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/fault-tolerance.html[documentation] and link:https://openliberty.io/guides/#fault_tolerance[guides].

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29110
// Contact/Reviewer: WhiteCat22
// // // // // // // //
[#rc]

> == Align your REST client with Jakarta RESTful Web Services in MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
== Align your REST client with Jakarta RESTful Web Services with MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0
```

> MicroProfile Rest Client provides a type-safe approach to invoke RESTful services over HTTP. As much as possible, the MicroProfile Rest Client attempts to use link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/[Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1] APIs for consistency and easier re-use.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
MicroProfile Rest Client provides a type-safe approach to invoke RESTful services over HTTP. As much as possible, the MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0 release attempts to use link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/restful-ws/3.1/[Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1] APIs for consistency and easier re-use.
```

The MicroProfile Rest Client 4.0 feature (`mpRestClient-4.0`) aligns with Jakarta RESTful Web Services 3.1 as part of the greater effort to align MicroProfile 7.0 with Jakarta EE10. The beta release of this feature includes the following updates:

* Added a new `RestClientBuilder.header(String, Object)` method to add dynamic headers to the request.

> * Added a new `RestClientBuilder.baseUri(String)` overload method so user's don't have to call `URI.create(String)`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Added a new `RestClientBuilder.baseUri(String)` overload method so users don't have to call `URI.create(String)`.
```

* Added clarification in the spec on how to use Jakarta RESTful Web Services `EntityPart` API for multipart requests.

For more information, see the following resources:

* link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-rest-client[Rest Client for MicroProfile] on GitHub
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-rest-client-4.0-RC2/microprofile-rest-client-spec-4.0-RC2.html[Rest Client for MicroProfile 4.0 RC2 specification document] (note that this is a release candidate link, the final release link should contain the same content but will have a different URL)

> * link:http://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-rest-client-4.0-RC2/apidocs/[API Javadoc] (also release candidate link)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-rest-client-4.0-RC2/microprofile-rest-client-spec-4.0-RC2.html[Rest Client for MicroProfile 4.0 RC2 specification document]
* link:http://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-rest-client-4.0-RC2/apidocs/[API Javadoc]
```
To be consistent with the other sections where the caveat is not added.

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29050
// Contact/Reviewer: Channyboy
// // // // // // // //

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29019
// Contact/Reviewer: yasmin-aumeeruddy
// // // // // // // //
[#mptel]

> == Collect and export HTTP metrics and logs in MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
== Collect and export HTTP metrics and logs with MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0
```

* System property: `otel.sdk.disabled=false`
* Environment variable: `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false`

To separately configure for multiple applications on a server, you can configure OpenTelemetry at the application level. However, you cannot collect runtime-level logs and metrics with this configuration.

By default, all OpenTelemetry data is exported to the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/exporters/#otlp[OTLP]. You can change each exporter with the following system properties and variables.

System properties:

* `otel.metrics.exporter`
* `otel.logs.exporter`
* `otel.traces.exporter`

Environment variables:

* `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER`
* `OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER`
* `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER`

=== MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 beta known issues

Tracing context is not transferred through threads in REST Client async requests. Therefore, context values are inconsistent with parent and child spans.

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28921
// Contact/Reviewer: Azquelt
// // // // // // // //

[#openapi]

> == Document APIs in OpenAPI 3.1 format and more in MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
== Document APIs in OpenAPI 3.1 format and more with MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0
```

Although very few specification changes were listed for the 2.2 release, the main change from 2.1 is the introduction of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/apidocs/server/jakarta/websocket/sendresult#getSession()[getSession()] method on the `SendResult` class. This method enables you to retrieve the original session that was used in the asynchronous remote call. This capability is useful for broadcasting messages to numerous listening clients.

To enable this feature, add the following configuration to your `server.xml` file.

[source,xml]
----
 <featureManager>
    <feature>websocket-2.2</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For more information, such as the Javadocs, specification documents, and other details, see link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/[Jakarta WebSocket 2.2].

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28921
// Contact/Reviewer: Riva-Tholoor-Philip, jhanders34
// // // // // // // //

[#jpa]

> == Use Jakarta Persistence with improved type safety and other enhancements in Jakarta Persistence 3.2

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
== Use Jakarta Persistence with improved type safety and other enhancements with Jakarta Persistence 3.2
```

=== MicroProfile

==== Platforms

* `microProfile-1.2`
* `microProfile-1.3`
* `microProfile-1.4`
* `microProfile-2.0`
* `microProfile-2.1`
* `microProfile-2.2`
* `microProfile-3.0`
* `microProfile-3.2`
* `microProfile-3.3`
* `microProfile-4.0`
* `microProfile-4.1`
* `microProfile-5.0`
* `microProfile-6.0`
* `microProfile-6.1`
* `microProfile-7.0`

==== Versionless features

* `mpConfig`
* `mpFaultTolerance`
* `mpHealth`
* `mpJwt`
* `mpMetrics`
* `mpOpenAPI`
* `mpOpenTracing`
* `mpRestClient`
* `mpTelemetry`

=== Jakarta EE and Java EE

==== Platforms

* `javaee-7.0`
* `javaee-8.0`
* `jakartaee-9.1`
* `jakartaee-10.0`
* `jakartaee-11.0`

==== Versionless features

Although Liberty uses different feature names and short names for some Java EE and Jakarta EE versions of the same feature, you can use either short name and the platform you specify pulls in the correct compatible feature.

* `appAuthentication` or `jaspic`
* `appAuthorization` or `jacc`
* `appClientSupport`
* `appSecurity`
* `batch`
* `beanValidation`
* `cdi`
* `concurrent`
* `connectors` or `jca`

> * `connectorsInboundSecurity` or `jcainboundSecurity`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `connectorsInboundSecurity` or `jcaInboundSecurity`
```

* `data`
* `enterpriseBeans` or `ejb`
* `enterpriseBeansHome` or `ejbhome`

> * `enterpriseBeansLite` or `ejblite`
> * `enterpriseBeansPersistentTimer` or `ejbpersistenttimer`
> * `enterpriseBeansRemote` or `ejbremote`
> * `expressionLanguage`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `enterpriseBeansLite` or `ejbLite`
* `enterpriseBeansPersistentTimer` or `ejbPersistentTimer`
* `enterpriseBeansRemote` or `ejbRemote`
* `expressionLanguage` or `el`
```

* `faces` or `jsf`

> * `jdbc`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `j2eeManagement`
* `jdbc`
```

* `jsonb`
* `jsonp`
* `mail` or `javaMail`
* `managedBeans`
* `mdb`
* `messaging` or `jms`

> * `messagingClient` or `wasjmsclient`
> * `messagingSecurity` or `wasjmssecurity`
> * `messagingServer` or `wasjmsserver`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `messagingClient` or `wasJmsClient`
* `messagingSecurity` or `wasJmsSecurity`
* `messagingServer` or `wasJmsServer`
```

* `pages` or `jsp`
* `persistence` or `jpa`
* `restfulWS` or `jaxrs`

> * `restfulWSClient` or `jaxrsclient`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `restfulWSClient` or `jaxrsClient`
```

MicroProfile Fault Tolerance helps you easily identify and mitigate failures in your code. It provides annotations that you can add to methods to use bulkhead, circuit breaker, retry, timeout, and fallback strategies.

The new `mpFaultTolerance-4.1` feature integrates with the `mpTelemetry-2.0` feature, so that Fault Tolerance can export metric data to Open Telemetry. With this change, and other changes in `mpTelemetry-2.0`, you can use Open Telemetry as the single source for logging, metrics, and tracing, making it easier to manage and configure your application observability.

To enable this functionality, enable `mpFaultTolerance-4.1` and `mpTelemetry-2.0` in your `server.xml` file and then configure `mpTelemetry-2.0` to export metrics. The following examples show a minimal configuration for Open Telemetry to export to your `messages.log` file and a class that generates Fault Tolerance metrics (it must be accessed as a CDI bean).

=== server.xml file configuration

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>mpFaultTolerance-4.1</feature>
  <feature>mpTelemetry-2.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

=== bootstrap.properties file configuration

> The following example configures Open Telemetry to only output metrics to the `messages.log` file.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The following example configures Open Telemetry to only output metrics to the `messages.log` file.
It also sets a very low interval for exporting metrics so you can see the results quickly.
```

To enable this functionality, enable `mpFaultTolerance-4.1` and `mpTelemetry-2.0` in your `server.xml` file and then configure `mpTelemetry-2.0` to export metrics. The following examples show a minimal configuration for Open Telemetry to export to your `messages.log` file and a class that generates Fault Tolerance metrics (it must be accessed as a CDI bean).

=== server.xml file configuration

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>mpFaultTolerance-4.1</feature>
  <feature>mpTelemetry-2.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

=== bootstrap.properties file configuration

The following example configures Open Telemetry to only output metrics to the `messages.log` file.
It also sets a very low interval for exporting metrics so you can see the results quickly.

[source,xml]
----
otel.sdk.disabled=false
otel.metrics.exporter=logging
otel.logs.exporter=none
otel.traces.exporter=none

> 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
otel.metric.export.interval=500
```

// change the SUB_TAG_1/2/3 to the heading tags
//
// However if there's only 1 new feature, delete the previous section and change it to the following sentence:
// "The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 24.0.0.8-beta includes SUB_FEATURE_TITLE"
// // // // // // // //

See also link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[previous Open Liberty beta blog posts].

[#versionless]
== Streamline feature selection with versionless Jakarta EE and MicroProfile features

With Open Liberty, you can configure only the features at the specific versions that your application needs. This composable design pattern minimizes the resources the runtime needs, keeping application startup times short and memory footprints low. However, you might not always know which version of a feature is compatible with the other features your application needs. Determining the correct version typically requires a mix of experimentation, guesswork, and digging deep into feature documentation. Versionless features alleviate this burden by automating feature version selection, so you can focus on building your applications instead of picking feature versions.

> Versionless features simplify your server configuration by providing are a generic way to specify Open Liberty features without having to specify a feature version. These new features are available for the MicroProfile, Jakarta EE, and Java EE platforms. When you use versionless features, you must specify a corresponding versioned platform element in your `server.xml` file.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Versionless features simplify your server configuration by providing a generic way to specify Open Liberty features without having to specify a feature version. These new features are available for the MicroProfile, Jakarta EE, and Java EE platforms. When you use versionless features, you must specify a corresponding versioned platform element in your `server.xml` file.
```

> For example, instead of specifying `servlet-6.1` in your `server.xml` file and having to figure out which other feature versions are compatible with Servlet 6.1, you can specify a platform version and `servlet`. The platform that you specify resolves all versionless features to a compatible version.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
For example, instead of specifying `servlet-6.0` in your `server.xml` file and having to figure out which other feature versions are compatible with Servlet 6.0, you can specify a platform version and `servlet`. The platform that you specify resolves all versionless features to a compatible version.
```
Since Servlet 6.1 is EE 11 and customers likely aren't using EE 11 features, it is probably better to use Servlet 6.0 from EE 10 in the example.

> The following `server.xml` file configuration uses versionless features with `MicroProfile-5.0` specified as the platform element.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The following `server.xml` file configuration uses versionless features with `microProfile-5.0` specified as the platform element.
```
Should be consistent with the example.

[source,xml]
----
    <!-- Enable features -->
    <featureManager>
        <platform>microProfile-5.0</platform>
        <feature>mpHealth</feature>
        <feature>mpMetrics</feature>
    </featureManager>
----

Another example is specifying a Java EE platform of `javaee-8.0` with associated versionless features that are defined for `servlet`, `jpa`, and `jaxrs`:

[source,xml]
----
    <!-- Enable features -->
    <featureManager>
        <platform>javaee-8.0</platform>
        <feature>servlet</feature>
        <feature>jpa</feature>
        <feature>jaxrs</feature>
    </featureManager>
----

> Check out the full collection of available platforms and versionless features in the <<platform-ref, lists at the end of this post>>. Stay tuned for more information versionless features in a forthcoming blog post and full documentation when versionless features are released for general availability (GA).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Check out the full collection of available platforms and versionless features in the <<platform-ref, lists at the end of this post>>. Stay tuned for more information about versionless features in a forthcoming blog post and full documentation when versionless features are released for general availability (GA).
```

// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29122
// Contact/Reviewer: benjamin-confino
// // // // // // // //

[#cookie]
== Keep using third party cookies with CHIPS

To increase privacy and reduce tracking, link:https://developers.google.com/privacy-sandbox/3pcd/[Google Chrome announced it would phase out third-party cookies in 2025]. Although, as of July 22, 2024, link:https://privacysandbox.com/news/privacy-sandbox-update/[Chrome stated they may scrap the phase out plan] due to regulatory concerns.  Users instead would be given the option to block third party cookies via their browser.  Partitioned would be needed for these use cases. Some sites that are designed with third-party cookies in mind are broken by browsers that opt-in to block third party cookies.  Chrome provides link:https://developers.google.com/privacy-sandbox/3pcd/prepare/test-for-breakage[documentation] to help you test whether your sites are affected. If you are, a handful of options are provided to mitigate this change. One such option is called CHIPS: Cookies Having Independent Partitioned State.

First, some background information regarding third-party (cross-site) cookies.

> Currently, if a top-level site X embeds another site Z, such as an iframe, then any cookies set by the embedded site `Z` might be shared with any other site that embeds site Z, such as top-level site Y. This vulnerability is due to cookies placed in a cookie jar under the Z site key. This scenario assumes that the cookie is labeled as `SameSite=None`, because it isn't shared when set to `Lax` or `Strict`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Currently, if a top-level site X embeds another site Z, such as an iframe, then any cookies set by the embedded site Z might be shared with any other site that embeds site Z, such as top-level site Y. This vulnerability is due to cookies placed in a cookie jar under the Z site key. This scenario assumes that the cookie is labeled as `SameSite=None`, because it isn't shared when set to `Lax` or `Strict`.
```
`Z` isn't consistently highlighted, so I removed the highlighting for the one place that it was.

The partitioned attribute configuration is opt-in and behaves much like the SameSite configuration. The `samesite` channel configuration applies to all cookies, while the `httpSession` and `webAppSecurity` configurations apply to their respective cookies. It's important to note that the the `httpSession` and `webAppSecurity` configuration take precedence over the channel configuration. The default values for these two are `defer`, which means they defer to the channel configuration. As for channel configuration, its default value is `false` meaning `Partitioned` is not added.

The following example shows how to set the `cookiePartitioned` attribute for the HTTP session cookie on the `httpSession` attribute in your `server.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<httpSession cookieSameSite="None" cookiePartitioned="defer|true|false"/>`
----

The following example shows how to set the `partitionedCookie` attribute for LTPA and JWT security cookies on the `webAppSecurity` attribute in your `server.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<webAppSecurity sameSiteCookie="None" partitionedCookie="defer|true|false"/>`
----

> The following example shows how to set the `partitioned` attribute for other cookies the `httpEndpoint` attribute in your `server.xml` file:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to set the `partitioned` attribute for other cookies on the `httpEndpoint` attribute in your `server.xml` file:
```

   <samesite none="*" partitioned="true|false"/>
</httpEndpoint>
----

Alternatively, you can set `Partitioned` by using the `Set-Cookie` header with the following two `HttpServletResponse` APIs:

* link:https://openliberty.io/docs/ref/javaee/8/#package=javax/servlet/http/package-frame.html&class=javax/servlet/http/HttpServletResponse.html#setHeader-java.lang.String-java.lang.String-[HttpServletResponse.setHeader]
* link:https://openliberty.io/docs/ref/javaee/8/#package=javax/servlet/http/package-frame.html&class=javax/servlet/http/HttpServletResponse.html#addHeader-java.lang.String-java.lang.String-[HttpServletResponse.addHeader]

For more information, including a visual example, see link:https://github.com/privacycg/CHIPS?tab=readme-ov-file#chips-cookies-having-independent-partitioned-state[CHIPS (Cookies Having Independent Partitioned State)] on GitHub.

[#ft]
== Integrate fault tolerance with Open Telemetry in Fault Tolerance 4.1

MicroProfile Fault Tolerance helps you easily identify and mitigate failures in your code. It provides annotations that you can add to methods to use bulkhead, circuit breaker, retry, timeout, and fallback strategies.

> The new `mpFaultTolerance-4.1` feature integrates with the `mpTelemetry-2.0` feature, so that Fault Tolerance can export metric data to Open Telemetry. With this change, and other changes in `mpTelemetry-2.0`, you can use Open Telemetry as the single source for logging, metrics, and tracing, making it easier to manage and configure your application observability.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The new `mpFaultTolerance-4.1` feature integrates with the `mpTelemetry-2.0` feature, so that Fault Tolerance can export metric data to Open Telemetry. With this change, and other changes in `mpTelemetry-2.0`, you can use Open Telemetry as the single source for logging, metrics, and tracing, to make it easier to manage and configure your application observability.
```
Maybe you chose to have `making` instead of `to make` for right documentation rules.  I think this flows better, but you can say it is not the way things should be worded.

To enable this functionality, enable `mpFaultTolerance-4.1` and `mpTelemetry-2.0` in your `server.xml` file and then configure `mpTelemetry-2.0` to export metrics. The following examples show a minimal configuration for Open Telemetry to export to your `messages.log` file and a class that generates Fault Tolerance metrics (it must be accessed as a CDI bean).

=== server.xml file configuration

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
  <feature>mpFaultTolerance-4.1</feature>
  <feature>mpTelemetry-2.0</feature>
</featureManager>
----

=== bootstrap.properties file configuration

The following example configures Open Telemetry to only output metrics to the `messages.log` file.
It also sets a very low interval for exporting metrics so you can see the results quickly.

[source,xml]
----
otel.sdk.disabled=false
otel.metrics.exporter=logging
otel.logs.exporter=none
otel.traces.exporter=none
otel.metric.export.interval=500

> TODO; set the timeout to a low number so people will see the metrics quickly. Then mention why you did so in the paragraph apart

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
@benjamin-confino is this `TODO` still a thing?  The interval is set and described.  Is that the `timeout` you were referring to?

----

=== Example application class

Ensure that this class is injected as a CDI bean and invoked by the user in whatever way you prefer.

[source,xml]
----
import org.eclipse.microprofile.faulttolerance.Retry;
import jakarta.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;

@ApplicationScoped
public class ExampleClass {

    @Retry
    public int exampleMethod(String name) {
        return 1;
    }
}
----

> You can read more detail about the changes in the new version in the link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-fault-tolerance-4.1-RC2/microprofile-fault-tolerance-spec-4.1-RC2.html[Microprofile Fault Tolerance 4.1 RC2 specification] and link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-fault-tolerance-4.1-RC2/apidocs/[API Javadoc].

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
You can read more details about the changes in the new version in the link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-fault-tolerance-4.1-RC2/microprofile-fault-tolerance-spec-4.1-RC2.html[Microprofile Fault Tolerance 4.1 RC2 specification] and link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-fault-tolerance-4.1-RC2/apidocs/[API Javadoc].
```

> You can learn more about how to use MicroProfile OpenAPI from our link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/fault-tolerance.html[documentation] and link:https://openliberty.io/guides/#fault_tolerance[guides].

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
You can learn more about how to use MicroProfile Fault Tolerance from our link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/fault-tolerance.html[documentation] and link:https://openliberty.io/guides/#fault_tolerance[guides].
```

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29050
// Contact/Reviewer: Channyboy
// // // // // // // //

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29019
// Contact/Reviewer: yasmin-aumeeruddy
// // // // // // // //
[#mptel]
== Collect and export HTTP metrics and logs in MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0

MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 (`mpTelemetry-2.0`) provides developers with the latest Open Telemetry technology. The feature now consumes `OpenTelemetry-1.34.0`. In addition to distributed tracing, the feature now allows OpenTelemetry to collect and export HTTP metrics and logs.

To enable the `mpTelemetry-2.0` feature to collect metrics, logs, and traces, add the following configuration to your `server.xml` file:

[source,xml]
----
<features>
   <feature>mpTelemetry-2.0</feature>

> </features>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
<featureManager>
   <feature>mpTelemetry-2.0</feature>
</featureManager>
```

To separately configure for multiple applications on a server, you can configure OpenTelemetry at the application level. However, you cannot collect runtime-level logs and metrics with this configuration.

By default, all OpenTelemetry data is exported to the link:https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/java/exporters/#otlp[OTLP]. You can change each exporter with the following system properties and variables.

System properties:

* `otel.metrics.exporter`
* `otel.logs.exporter`
* `otel.traces.exporter`

Environment variables:

* `OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER`
* `OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER`
* `OTEL_TRACES_EXPORTER`

=== MicroProfile Telemetry 2.0 beta known issues

Tracing context is not transferred through threads in REST Client async requests. Therefore, context values are inconsistent with parent and child spans.

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28921
// Contact/Reviewer: Azquelt
// // // // // // // //

[#openapi]
== Document APIs in OpenAPI 3.1 format and more in MicroProfile OpenAPI 4.0

> link:https://www.openapis.org/[OpenAPI] is a standardized way to document REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. MicroProfile OpenAPI helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications that are built using JAX-RS or Jakarta restfulWS. This documentation is useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
link:https://www.openapis.org/[OpenAPI] is a standardized way to document REST APIs in a JSON or YAML format. MicroProfile OpenAPI helps you generate and serve OpenAPI documentation for your REST applications that are built using JAX-RS or Jakarta RESTful Web Services. This documentation is useful for developers to test out the API during development, or for people using the API in production.
```

This is an early beta release to support the ratification of MicroProfile 7.0. As such, some function which was available in previous versions of the feature are not yet implemented:

- Documenting more than one web module as link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html#multi-module[can be configured in previous versions]
- Validation of the produced OpenAPI document

=== Further resources:

For more information, see the following resources:

- link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-4.0-RC4/microprofile-openapi-spec-4.0-RC4.html[MP OpenAPI 4.0 RC4 specification document] and link:https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-open-api-4.0-RC4/apidocs/[API Javadoc].
- link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/documentation-openapi.html[API documentation with OpenAPI]
- Guide: link:https://openliberty.io/guides/microprofile-openapi.html[Documenting RESTful APIs]

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28869
// Contact/Reviewer: KyleAure,njr-11
// // // // // // // //

[#data]

> == Bring your own Jakarta Data provider with Jakarta Data API 1.0
> 
> Jakarta Data 1.0 is a new Jakarta EE specification that standardizes a repository-based programming model for data access across relational and non-relational databases.
> 
> The Jakarta Data API feature (`dataContainer-1.0`) enables you to use third-party Jakarta Data providers in Open Liberty without including the built-in provider for EclipseLink. This configuration is useful if you want to use a different Jakarta Persistence-based Jakarta Data provider, such as Hibernate, without colliding on the Jakarta Persistence Entity annotation. It's also useful if you want to use Jakarta NoSQL exclusively and do not want the overhead of the built-in provider for relational databases.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
== Bring your own Jakarta Data provider with Jakarta Data Container 1.0

Jakarta Data 1.0 is a new Jakarta EE specification that standardizes a repository-based programming model for data access across relational and non-relational databases.

The Jakarta Data Container feature (`dataContainer-1.0`) enables you to use third-party Jakarta Data providers in Open Liberty without including the built-in provider for EclipseLink. This configuration is useful if you want to use a different Jakarta Persistence-based Jakarta Data provider, such as Hibernate, without colliding on the Jakarta Persistence Entity annotation. It's also useful if you want to use Jakarta NoSQL exclusively and do not want the overhead of the built-in provider for relational databases.
```

@njr-11 should it be called `Jakarta Data Container` instead of `Jakarta Data API` feature.  It is called that in the feature file and it aligns with what is done with the faces container feature.

Reviewer: I prefer "Jakarta Data API" because it gives the user a better impression of what it is. A user will not know what a "Jakarta Data Container" is. It is not a concept from the spec, nor is it intuitive. But they will know exactly what they are getting with "Jakarta Data API".

Reviewer 7: The main concern was the inconsistency with the other xxxContainer features discussed in the blog since both faces and persistence Container features are mentioned.

To use a third-party Jakarta Data provider, enable the `dataContainer-1.0` feature in your `server.xml` file. You can then include a third-party Jakarta Data provider in your server configuration by using the `library` element.

The following `server.xml` file example shows the configuration to use the Eclipse jNoSQL Jakarta Data provider and a MongoDB database:

[source,xml]
----
  <featureManager>
    <feature>dataContainer-1.0</feature>

    <!-- Features needed for jNoSQL config / processing -->
    <feature>mpConfig-3.1</feature>
    <feature>jsonb-3.0</feature>
  </featureManager>

  <library id="jnosql">
  	<!-- Jakarta NoSQL API -->
  	<fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/nosql" includes="jakarta.nosql-api.jar" />
  	<!-- Eclipse jNoSQL Implementation of Jakarta NoSQL and Jakarta Data -->
    <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/jnosql"

>     	includes="jnosql-communication-core.jar jnosql-mapping-core.jar jnosql-mongodb.jar *.jar" />

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
    	includes="jnosql-communication-core.jar jnosql-mapping-core.jar jnosql-mongodb.jar" />
```
@njr-11 It seems odd to list jar files and also include `*.jar`.  Should `*.jar` be removed from this fileset or the other jar maybe be removed?

Reviewer: @KyleAure wrote this example and I believe also tried them out. Kyle - could you confirm if other jars were needed in this case, and in the case of Jared's subsequent comment.

Reviewer 2: @njr-11  @jhanders34 Yes, there are transitive dependencies needed by the jnosql drivers.  I figured this would be a good way to represent "Here are the drivers you need, but also include all their dependencies as well."

    	includes="mongodb-driver-core.jar mongodb-driver-sync.jar" />
  </library>

  <!-- MongoDB connection configuration -->
  <variable name="jnosql.mongodb.host" value="${MONGO_HOST}"/>
  <variable name="jnosql.document.database" value="${MONGO_DBNAME}"/>

  <application location="MyApplication.war">
    <classloader commonLibraryRef="jnosql" />
  </application>
----

To use a third-party Jakarta Persistence-based Jakarta Data provider, include the `dataContainer-1.0` and `persistenceContainer-3.2` features. You can then include the third-party Jakarta Data provider in your server configuration by using a `library` element.

The following `server.xml` file example shows the configuration to use the Hibernate ORM Jakarta Data provider and a PostgreSQL database:

[source,xml]
----
  <featureManager>
    <feature>dataContainer-1.0</feature>
    <feature>persistenceContainer-3.2</feature>

    <!-- Features needed for Hibernate config / processing -->
    <feature>xmlBinding-4.0</feature>
  </featureManager>

  <!-- Hibernate Implementation of Jakarta Persistence and Jakarta Data -->
  <library id="hibernate">
      <fileset dir="${shared.resource.dir}/hibernate"

>         includes="hibernate-core.jar hibernate-models.jar *.jar"/>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
        includes="hibernate-core.jar hibernate-models.jar"/>
```

@njr-11 same question here

Reviewer 2: Yes, there are transitive dependencies needed by the hibernate drivers.

- link:https://github.com/jakartaee/nosql[Eclipse jNoSQL support]

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28770
// Contact/Reviewer: volosied,pnicolucci
// // // // // // // //

[#faces]
== Bring your own Jakarta Faces implementation with Jakarta Faces Container 4.1

Jakarta Faces is a Model-View-Controller (MVC) framework for building web applications. It offers many convenient features, such as state management and input validation.

The Jakarta Faces Container 4.1 feature (`facesContainer-4.1`) enables you to bring your own Jakarta Faces API and implementation to Liberty. The alternative is to use the Liberty-provided `faces-4.1` feature, which provides the MyFaces 4.1 API and implementation.

The Faces Container feature is updated in this beta release to support the 4.1 API and implementation JARs. If the 4.1 JARs were used with earlier features, errors occurred because the feature checks against the specification version listed within the jars.

> To use the `facesContainer-4.1` feature, add the following code to your `server.xml` file:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
To use the `facesContainer-4.1` feature, add the following configuration to your `server.xml` file:
```

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
   <feature>facesContainer-4.1</feature>
</featureManager>
----

For more information, see the following resources:

* link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/reference/feature/facesContainer-4.0.html[Jakarta Faces Container 4.0] feature
* link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2024/07/02/24.0.0.7-beta.html#faces41[Faces 4.1 beta blog announcement]
* link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/faces/4.1/[Faces 4.1 Javadocs and specification document].

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28769
// Contact/Reviewer: volosied,pnicolucci
// // // // // // // //

[#websocket]
== Improve asynchronous handling with Jakarta WebSocket 2.2

> The Jakarta WebSocket 2.2 (`websocket-2.2`) feature enables communication for endpoints by using the Websocket protocol. It is an implementation of the Jakarta EE 11 Websocket 2.2 Specification.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The Jakarta WebSocket 2.2 (`websocket-2.2`) feature enables communication for endpoints by using the WebSocket protocol. It is an implementation of the Jakarta EE 11 WebSocket 2.2 Specification.
```

Although very few specification changes were listed for the 2.2 release, the main change from 2.1 is the introduction of the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/apidocs/server/jakarta/websocket/sendresult#getSession()[getSession()] method on the `SendResult` class. This method enables you to retrieve the original session that was used in the asynchronous remote call. This capability is useful for broadcasting messages to numerous listening clients.

> The next beta release of websocket-2.2 will limit the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/apidocs/server/jakarta/websocket/onmessage#maxMessageSize()[MaxMessageSize] to `Integer#MAX_VALUE` for the `OnMessage` annotation to avoid type errors.

Reviewer 7: @volosied / @pnicolucci is this pre-announcing something in a future beta or is it included in this beta?  If in this beta, it should be updated not say `The next beta`. If it will be in the next beta, I think maybe this line should be removed?

Reviewer 6: @jhanders34 this is a pre-announcement . If this is unusual to do, it could be removed and we could just do another websockets beta blog for 24009 beta

Reviewer 6: The change is small which is way we decided to just say in the next beta.

Reviewer 8: I've removed it, will announce in 24.0.0.9-beta

Reviewer 7: It could be added as a known issue for WebSocket 2.2 in this beta release if something isn't the way it is supposed to be.  In other sections of this beta blog post you can see where that has been done.

> The next beta release of websocket-2.2 will limit the link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/apidocs/server/jakarta/websocket/onmessage#maxMessageSize()[MaxMessageSize()] to `Integer#MAX_VALUE` for the `OnMessage` annotation to avoid type errors.

Reviewer 6: `[MaxMessageSize]` so it doesn't look like a method.

> To enable this feature, add the following code to your `server.xml` file.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
To enable this feature, add the following configuration to your `server.xml` file.
```

[source,xml]
----
 <featureManager>
    <feature>websocket-2.2</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> For more information, such as the Javadocs, specification documents, and other details,see link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/[Jakarta WebSocket 2.2].

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
For more information, such as the Javadocs, specification documents, and other details, see link:https://jakarta.ee/specifications/websocket/2.2/[Jakarta WebSocket 2.2].
```

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/28921
// Contact/Reviewer: Riva-Tholoor-Philip, jhanders34
// // // // // // // //

[#jpa]
== Use Jakarta Persistence with improved type safety and other enhancements in Jakarta Persistence 3.2

> The Jakarta Persistence API is a richly featured API which provides object-model approach to persisting, fetching, and modifying data stored on a relational database system.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The Jakarta Persistence feature provides a rich API which includes an object-model approach to persist, fetch, and modify data stored on a relational database system.
```
If you wanted to keep the verbs with `ing`, then I think the `to` should change to `for`.

Jakarta Persistence 3.2 (`persistence-3.2`) includes the following updates:

* Improve type safety of the find() and refresh() methods
* Provide programmatic way to provide Schema Management
* Allow Java records as Embeddable Types

> * Improvements of JPQL/Criteria API - add additional functions and operations, such as `left`, `right`, `replace`, `||` operator, `cast`, `union`, `union all`, `intersect`, `intersect all`, `except`, and  `except all`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* Additional functions and operators to the JPQL/Criteria API,  such as `left`, `right`, `replace`, `||` operator, `cast`, `union`, `union all`, `intersect`, `intersect all`, `except`, and  `except all`
```

* Support for subqueries in the `select`, `from`,  and `join` clauses.

> To use the `persistence-3.2` feature, add the following code to your `server.xml` file:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
To use the `persistence-3.2` feature, add the following configuration to your `server.xml` file:
```

[source,xml]
----
<featureManager>
   <feature>persistence-3.2</feature>
</featureManager>
----

> This feature uses Eclipselink 5.0 and the JPA provider. If you wish to bring your own 3rd party persistence provider, enable the `persistenceContainer-3.2` feature instead:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This feature uses Eclipselink 5.0 beta release as the Jakarta Persistence provider. If you wish to bring your own 3rd party persistence provider, enable the `persistenceContainer-3.2` feature instead:
```

For more information on using a beta release, refer to the link:{url-prefix}docs/latest/installing-open-liberty-betas.html[Installing Open Liberty beta releases] documentation.

[#feedback]
== We welcome your feedback

Let us know what you think on link:https://groups.io/g/openliberty[our mailing list]. If you hit a problem, link:https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/open-liberty[post a question on StackOverflow]. If you hit a bug, link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues[please raise an issue].

[#platform-ref]
== Platforms and related versionless features reference list

The following platform features are available in this beta release. You can specify up to 2 platform elements, one for MicroProfile, another for either Jakarta EE or Java EE.

=== MicroProfile

Platforms:

* `microProfile-1.2`
* `microProfile-1.3`
* `microProfile-1.4`
* `microProfile-2.0`
* `microProfile-2.1`
* `microProfile-2.2`
* `microProfile-3.0`
* `microProfile-3.2`
* `microProfile-3.3`
* `microProfile-4.0`
* `microProfile-4.1`
* `microProfile-5.0`
* `microProfile-6.0`

> * `microProfile-6.1`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `microProfile-6.1`
* `microProfile-7.0`
```
For the beta blog microProfile-7.0 can be added because microProfile-7.0 is in this beta.  When doing the GA blog for versionless features, I don't think microProfile-7.0 will be available yet so it would not be included in the GA blog yet.  @cbridgha or @rsherget can you confirm that this should be added?

Reviewer 10: microProfile-7.0 is part of the beta and works with versionless for beta so it should be added

MicroProfile versionless features:

* `mpConfig`
* `mpFaultTolerance`
* `mpHealth`
* `mpJwt`
* `mpMetrics`
* `mpOpenAPI`
* `mpOpenTracing`
* `mpRestClient`
* `mpTelemetry`

==== Jakarta EE

Platforms:

* `jakartaee-9.1`

> * `jakartaee-10.0`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `jakartaee-10.0`
* `jakartaee-11.0`
```
Again @cbridgha and @rsherget can you confirm adding this is appropriate since the beta image includes jakartaee-11.0 features?  We could add `(for Jakarta EE 11 features in beta)` or something like that.  If `jakartaee-11.0` platform shouldn't be included, then `data` below shouldn't be included.

Reviewer 10: yes the beta has jakartaee-11.0 and works for versionless so it should be added

Jakarta EE versionless features:

* `appAuthentication`
* `appAuthorization`
* `appClientSupport`
* `appSecurity`
* `batch`
* `beanValidation`
* `cdi`
* `concurrent`
* `connectors`
* `connectorsInboundSecurity`
* `data`
* `enterpriseBeans`
* `enterpriseBeansHome`
* `enterpriseBeansLite`

> * `expressionLanguage`
> * `enterpriseBeansPersistentTimer`
> * `enterpriseBeansRemote`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `enterpriseBeansPersistentTimer`
* `enterpriseBeansRemote`
* `expressionLanguage`
```

* `faces`

> * `j2eeManagement`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
j2eeManagement is only in Java EE

Reviewer 8: Based on this and Jared's previous comment- I think we will need to maintain separate lists of platforms and features for OL vs WL when we GA. Is that correct @rsherget @cbridgha ? AT least until we can integrate versionless feature reference with the autogenerated feature docs

* `jdbc`
* `jsonb`
* `jsonp`
* `mail`
* `managedBeans`
* `mdb`
* `messaging`
* `messagingClient`
* `messagingSecurity`
* `messagingServer`
* `pages`
* `persistence`
* `restfulWS`
* `restfulWSClient`
* `servlet`
* `websocket`
* `xmlBinding`
* `xmlWS`

==== Java EE

Platforms:

> * `javaee-6.0`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```

@cbridgha or @rsherget since this is an Open Liberty beta and Open Liberty doesn't support Java EE 6, should it be removed from the list?

Reviewer 10: I'm not 100% sure on this answer but that sounds right to me.

Reviewer 7: Actually we did not mark jsp-2.2 for the beta in OL since it was javaee-6.0, so yes `javaee-6.0` should be removed.

* `javaee-7.0`
* `javaee-8.0`

Java EE versionless features:

* `appClientSupport`
* `appSecurity`
* `batch`
* `beanValidation`
* `cdi`
* `concurrent`

> * `jca`
> * `jcainboundsecurity`
> * `data`
> * `ejb`
> * `ejbhome`
> * `ejblite`
> * `el`
> * `ejbpersistenttimer`
> * `ejbremote`
> * `jacc`
> * `jaspic`
> * `javaMail`
> * `jaxb`
> * `jaxws`
> * `jaxrs`
> * `jaxrsclient`
> * `jpa`
> * `jsf`
> * `jsp`
> * `j2eeManagement`
> * `jdbc`
> * `jms`
> * `jsonb`
> * `jsonp`
> * `managedBeans`
> * `mdb`
> * `servlet`
> * `websocket`
> * `wasjmsclient`
> * `wasjmssecurity`
> * `wasjmsserver`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* `ejb`
* `ejbHome`
* `ejbLite`
* `ejbPersistentTimer`
* `ejbRemote`
* `el`
* `j2eeManagement`
* `jacc`
* `jaspic`
* `javaMail`
* `jaxb`
* `jaxrs`
* `jaxrsClient`
* `jaxws`
* `jca`
* `jcaInboundSecurity`
* `jdbc`
* `jms`
* `jpa`
* `jsf`
* `jsonb`
* `jsonp`
* `jsp`
* `managedBeans`
* `mdb`
* `servlet`
* `wasJmsClient`
* `wasJmsSecurity`
* `wasJmsServer`
* `websocket`
```

In reality these can be combined and say Java EE and Jakarta EE platforms and then in the bulleted points do:

* `ejb` or `enterpriseBeans`

We support both with Java or Jakarta EE and don't require you to use Java EE feature names for Java EE platforms or vice versa.  You can mix and match.  @cbridgha and @rsherget what do you think?

Reviewer 8: the original draft list Harry wrote up had the feature names for Java/Jakarta on the same line with a slash like
`ejb/enterpriseBeans`, which I thought was hard to read and confusing. But my thinking here was that nobody needs _both_ Java EE and Jakarta EE features, so just let the user self select the list they care about. but if

> We support both with Java or Jakarta EE and don't require you to use Java EE feature names for Java EE platforms or vice versa.

why do we even need two sets of versionless feature names?  Why not just have everyone use Jakarta names and declare whichever platform they need? There's probably a good answer im overlooking here :)

When versionless features GA- I m hoping to have only one reference source out there for these features- in the docs, and the GA blog will point there. Will probably also remove this list and just list the MP/EE platforms that are beta only (pointing to docs for full list). But for the next couple weeks, this will be the only list of versionless features and platforms.

Reviewer 7: There will still be both versions of the feature names in the GA.  You can use the javaee or jakartaee names for any of the javaee / jakartaee platform names.

</httpEndpoint>
----

Alternatively, you can set `Partitioned` by using the `Set-Cookie` header with the following two `HttpServletResponse` APIs:

* link:https://openliberty.io/docs/ref/javaee/8/#package=javax/servlet/http/package-frame.html&class=javax/servlet/http/HttpServletResponse.html#setHeader-java.lang.String-java.lang.String-[HttpServletResponse.setHeader]
* link:https://openliberty.io/docs/ref/javaee/8/#package=javax/servlet/http/package-frame.html&class=javax/servlet/http/HttpServletResponse.html#addHeader-java.lang.String-java.lang.String-[HttpServletResponse.addHeader]

For more information, including a visual example, see link:https://github.com/privacycg/CHIPS?tab=readme-ov-file#chips-cookies-having-independent-partitioned-state[CHIPS (Cookies Having Independent Partitioned State)] on GitHub.

// DO NOT MODIFY THIS LINE. </GHA-BLOG-TOPIC>
// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // //
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/29190
// Contact/Reviewer: yasmin-aumeeruddy
// // // // // // // //

[#mp7]
== Enable the full set of MicroProfile 7.0 beta features with the MicroProfile 7.0 convenience feature

> The 24.0.0.8-beta release includes the beta release of MicroProfile 7.0 and the `microProfile-7.0` link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html#[convconvenience feature].

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The 24.0.0.8-beta release includes the beta release of MicroProfile 7.0 and the `microProfile-7.0` link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html#[convenience feature].
```
